welcome to the latest episode of the
equation strict where I take some of the
most important equations in math and
then strip the back layer by layer so
that anyone can understand this time
we're looking at Newton's law of gravity
now this is one of the most important
discoveries in the history of science
because it really set the scene for
modern-day physics and our current
understanding of the universe by
introducing the idea that we can use
simple mathematical equations to
describe the world around us it is of
course a familiar story Sir Isaac Newton
is sitting in his garden contemplating
the meaning of life in the universe one
fine sunny day when an Apple falls from
a tree in a perfect perpendicular
straight line and hits the ground and
suddenly everything made sense this
moment was Newson's equivalent of
Archimedes in ancient Greece filling his
bathtub and screaming Eureka as he ran
down the streets this was the point when
Newton figured it all out
and what he'd figured out was not only
that the earth was exerting a force
which we now call gravity that was
pulling the Apple down towards it but
the Apple itself
must also be exerting a force it's much
weaker but the Apple is also drawing the
earth towards itself and that is the key
insight in Newton's work not only did
Newton discover gravity but by writing
it down as a simple mathematical
equation in the form of Newton's law of
gravity it meant that he could start to
do calculations start to work out
exactly what the forces were between
objects and knowing what the forces are
you can then start to work out how
objects will behave and perhaps the most
important or famous calculation the
Newton did was to show that the planets
in our solar system actually go around
the Sun in elliptical orbits so the
orbits are ellipses sort of squashed
circles of course since the days of
Newton we've moved
long way in our understanding of our
solar system for example we've launched
rockets into space we've launched
satellites into space if you think about
right now all of the satellites orbiting
the Earth that is only possible because
of very precise calculations about the
strength of the Earth's gravitational
field and all of those calculations are
done based on Newton's Lord he wrote
down several hundred years ago and they
have to be exact because for a satellite
to remain in orbit around the earth it
has to go at a particular exact speed so
that it stays on the circular path and
if you're slightly out your satellite
might start to drift closer and closer
to the earth and would crash or it might
start to drift further and further away
and be lost to space and so without
newton's law of gravity we wouldn't
really have satellites we wouldn't be
able to keep them in orbit around the
earth and so that means no modern
communications no television no mobile
phones no GPS to know you location and
it definitely means no space travel
having now straight back to the second
layer we're going to look at what the
equation actually means and it tells us
the force of attraction between two
objects depends on the mass of those
objects and the distance that's between
them so our F here is our force of
attraction and then this term on the
right hand side we have a fraction so we
have a numerator and a denominator and
you can basically think of it as mass
over distance
so for the force to increase then the
mass would either increase so bigger
objects would have a bigger attractive
force or the distance could decrease so
if the object would move closer together
there is a stronger force of attraction
between them so big objects close
together have a very strong attractive
force and small objects far apart and
they're very weak
tractive force in terms of the effect of
the distance between two objects on the
strength of the gravitational force we
can think about our solar system so of
course we have the Sun at the center
which is this huge massive ball of fire
and you have all the planets orbiting
the Sun in elliptical orbits as
calculated by Newton and as the distance
increases you're getting further and
further away from the Sun and so you'd
expect the gravitational pull of the Sun
to be weaker according to Newton's law
of gravity and we know that this is the
case because we can actually calculate
the speed at which the planets are
moving in their orbits around the Sun
and the speed relates to the strength of
the gravitational force because the
stronger the force from the Sun pulling
the planet towards it the faster the
planet has to move to remain in orbit
the planet isn't going fast enough it
will be pulled into the Sun and be
destroyed
and as you can see as we move further
and further from the Sun the distance
increases the speed is decreasing as we
would expect now that I strip back to
the third layer we're going to look at
the individual terms in Newton's law of
gravity in our equation and as you may
have guessed the F on the left-hand side
this is our force of attraction this is
our gravity and then moving onto the
right hand side we have four terms the
first one capital G this is the
gravitational constant so this is a
fixed number given by six point six
seven times ten to the minus eleven it's
a tiny tiny number and this is fixed
across the whole universe and Newton
knew that this existed because he put it
in his equation but it wasn't actually
measured until seventy one years after
Newton's death by Henry Cavendish and
one is massive object one and two
massive object two as you might expect
and then the denominator on the bottom
we have d squared so D here is the
distance between our two objects and
fact with its a squared and it's the
denominator it's on the bottom is the
reason that this whole law is sometimes
also known as the inverse square law
you'll notice is so far that we've only
been discussing two bodies in this
problem and the force between those two
objects and that's because in this form
u2's law of gravity talks about m1 and
m2 is maximum one massive object to and
the distance D between them there's only
two objects but of course systems exist
where there are three or more objects
all interacting so you could think of
the Sun and we have the earth going
around the Sun and then you have the
moon going around the earth so how does
the presence of the moon affect the
Earth's orbit around the Sun you've
suddenly got a three body problem with
three objects with three masses and
different distances between all of them
and so the problem becomes more
complicated and you kind of must work
this out but you have to use
approximations and the reason that
Newton's simple law in this form for two
bodies has sort of withstood the test of
time the fact that is still used and
important today is because the
approximations that you make they all
come back to just using this very very
simple form and that is why this
equation it's so important and just so
great really thank you everyone for
watching I hope you've enjoyed it I hope
you've learned something about Newton's
law of gravity if you like what I'm
doing please do subscribe then you'll be
the first to know when I release a new
video also you can check out all of my
material on my website Tom rocks Matt's
calm and you can find me on social media
I'm on twitter facebook Instagram all at
Tom rocks Matt's and I will see you next
time with another equation ready to be
stripped